In the last semester of my graduate degree, I suffered from an emotional breakdown. The term is not a medical term nor officially recognized by mental health professionals; my own therapist and I have struggled to find a concise word that describes my experience to laypersons, and through discussion, we have found this one acceptable, despite my experience being nuanced and layered with complications. Overarchingly though, the term emotional breakdown is used to describe acute, severe anxiety and depression that develops in a formerly functional individual that is caused by a stress related event in one’s life. It can manifest with similar symptoms to that of the acute stages of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and leave the person unable to function properly until they recover. As a mental health crisis, it’s debilitating, confusing and dangerous without the proper treatment, care and inner understanding.My own experience is not why I am articulating these words here today. The real reason I write these words is because of what I experienced after I had rebuilt myself and recovered in the wake of an incredibly significant and tumultuous time in my own life: the experience of moving forward, speaking openly, and unfortunately, having to defend myself in the wake of miscommunications and other people’s misperceptions of my own status. It’s these experiences that have had the most profound impact on me, the catalyst of which is based on the feelings of being put in a position where I had to defend myself in a way that no person should have to, ever, and receiving a wake up call to fully understand and accept the severity of what I had gone through and recognize the hard work I had done to overcome. I was put into that position, not just by anyone, but by the friend and good person with responsibility in creating those stressors that caused my own crisis to begin with. It’s a complicated story, but one that I’m comfortable with, and in the end, honestly, mostly quite grateful for. As someone turning 30 years old this year, I’ve gained a lot of perspective in a very relatively short period of time that ended up only being positive, in every sense of the word.First and foremost, I’d like to note that I do have generalized anxiety disorder and that is never going to go away. While it has contributed to the severity of my experience and managing that disorder has effectively allowed me to create the tools to be successful in my recovery, it was never the underlying problem in why that experience existed in the first place. Prior to a couple months before my 28th birthday, I had been a functional adult silently managing on my own for most of my cognizant life. My parents have often referred to me as a “worrier” and like many people with these types of disorders, the real problems that arise boil underneath the surface, often going untreated. I was very fortunate enough to meet a lovely young woman and very good friend of mine who suggested therapy, and I got in touch with a cognitive behavior therapist in my area. For the first time in my life, I went to get treatment. I was nervous, a bit uncomfortable about having to go see a specialist, and uncertain about what would be the outcome, but after that first appointment I felt liberated and excited to be finally dealing with my problems head on, all during my second year of completing an intensive graduate degree program.Unfortunately for me, I was also living with a friend of mine. She knew about my anxiety issues and that I had begun to see a therapist, which can be precarious for anyone at first go. However, she was going through some problems of her own sharing space with someone else, and, if things had played out differently than they did, I probably would have adjusted quickly and successfully to my new found sense of liberation from my long standing anxiety issues. But as things did begin to play out during the first month or two of living together, she rather negligently, unempathetically, and passive aggressively projected her negative feelings onto me, while treating the apartment as her own and, myself, like a stranger. Neither she nor I could have known what kind of harm and negative impact on my own life those actions would end up having, but that buildup was part of the turning point leading to the beginning of my own crisis. Not only did this projection succeed, but, albeit unintentionally, she created a hostile, unsafe and toxic environment, making me afraid of her and being in the apartment itself, a byproduct and set of triggers that still haunt me to this day. Being afraid of a friend who you care for is, in my opinion, the saddest thing about my experience and always will be.She would end up leaving abruptly and insensitively, which associated further bad memories on the physical space of my living arrangement. But with all this lack of self-awareness on her part, I was ultimately concerned about her and her behavior, not for myself. I didn’t realize what our apartment would end up doing to me psychologically or understand what I was experiencing with her behavior would be traumatic and extremely stressful to my own day to day functioning of life. As it turned out, it was too much for me, and reflecting back, I believe I showed many warning signs of someone about to break down. I’m not entirely sure what could have been done to correct things before they started, but I know that I partly needed the other person to show consideration, empathy and sensitivity. Purely psychological behaviors and actions have purely psychological consequences, and the struggle over articulating that to her after I recovered, as well as her own responsibility in that creation is something that would later bring about the reason why these words are being written today.I’d prefer to keep details of the months living in that environment for another time and place, but I will say that living in the apartment afterwards alone, unbeknownst to most people, I was actually a danger to myself, and subconsciously, I knew that and I dealt with it the best way I could. If I hadn’t had the support of my therapist and a few very close confidants (and even they probably didn’t understand how severe it was at the time), I’m not sure where I’d be. I was never suicidal, but there were moments where I knew that how I was coping would end up doing me a lot of self-harm. I was under distress, but like most people going through a mental health crisis such as my own, I was unable to accurately pinpoint why I felt the way I did until I was able to start resolving my situation independently. Those who were exposed to that distress and state of mind know that how I portrayed myself outwardly was both confusing and ambiguous. I apologize to them.Honestly, the one person who was exposed the most, was my friend and former roommate herself. There was a time period last spring where I sent a lot of uncomfortable noise to her and I take full responsibility for my behavior, especially now, having full perspective over why that behavior existed, even if I was not actually aware of how manifestations of my mental duress were being perceived. A lot of it can be contributed to me living and sleeping in an environment that was one of my outside stressors and triggers, and I did not have the ability to process any real emotion or thought process effectively. It was very distressing and dangerous, and it took a long time to resolve on my own through time, effort, a lot of perspective and gaining enough self respect to be open about what happened to me. One of the cognizant choices I made was to stay away from the apartment during the day, and coming home at night, which caused me anxiety, panic and insomnia.Around April, I started to see the success of cognitive behavior therapy which cleared up some fog to start thinking effectively. In May, I started taking an SSRI (I still am on medication, a year later, and plan to continue to be for some time. I sleep well, I dream vividly, and as an anxiety/depression management tool, it works wonders) which further helped me recover. However, to be able to process emotions and express them all at once proved to be a distressing flow of information and I did not yet have the mindset to be more thoughtful about what was a (and still is) very delicate, complicated and sensitive issue. Think about how people react to sudden floods that threaten their well-being and transplant that into conscious reality. It can be overwhelming. Expressions of this distress manifested in tones that wavered in intensity to the person whom, through that process working through this sudden flood of information, I discovered had responsibility in the matter. I was upset, and knew that a lot of things has happened in the previous few months which made her distance herself from me and her former residence. My friend, of course, deserves the biggest apology out of everyone for receiving that noise, and truthfully, I have tried to communicate a very supportive and positive viewpoint, not only to her but to others as well. I know that one person’s comfort is another person’s discomfort, but we all have to eventually face horrible things with an open and embracing mind. It takes time and perspective to adjust, but it is well worth it.At some point in that process during my recovery, I made the conscious and informed decision that keeping this all to myself and not sharing some incredibly fundamental things about my life would end up being harmful and delay any sort of attempts to move past previous troubles and anxieties. I also wanted to go through the effort to speak to my friend personally in order to come to some sort of understanding, mostly out of respect for her. Essentially, I wanted to hold her accountable and let her know that I wanted to express myself as a way to move forward from what had, at the point, been an awful experience. Knowing something is harmful and having loyalty to a friend who negatively impacted me, I believe I largely never expressed the full severity to her up until that point as a way to protect her. Regardless, it was then during the summer that I started asking to meet with her, and slowly but intensely, revealing the damage she had done. I was under the impression that the revelations and responsibility over harming someone would be upsetting and hard to take in, if she were thinking about this at all. Despite being willing to give her time to effectively process on her own like I had, I remained desperate to move forward with my decision and waiting around for her caused me some distress.I could not have known that her viewpoint of me at that point in time would be so fractured that she would have the perspective she ended up having. My perspective at this point in time, is that whatever distance she created on her own had made it difficult to bridge that gap in communication, especially as my tone was uncomfortably erratic with my own distress of feeling overwhelmed with information. From my understanding, she was unwilling to listen to the words I was trying to say, thought I was someone in need of help and support, and was not someone in control. Under that perception, she spoke out in anger and frustration, and at that point, I realized we were never on the same page and my efforts to speak to her seemed rather pointless. I was called unwell, and linked to our regional stalking law. This, at the time, seemed more hurtful to me than any other thing that had happened so far. Honestly, I understand how that perspective had developed, but it was absolutely devastating to be judged on such a fundamental level. I think, just as things had become overwhelming to me, things had become overwhelming to her too.My interpretation of her behavior/actions was that she was accusing me of stalking her and that psychologically, I was unwell enough to not be aware of what I was doing. I felt at that very moment that this person whom I called a friend and wanted to speak to, had developed a fractured viewpoint of me and I was very much hurt, but also, honestly, very angry. I believed she was calling me crazy or thought I was delusional. My initial reaction to this was based purely off emotion and anxiety, as I tried to figure out ways to defend myself legally. I think that the gravitas of these actions were major game-changers for me, and began to subtly change my confidence level and my commitment to opening up about my own experience. My emotional breakdown was a personal injury, and thankfully I had recovered and was incredibly proud of my success. I would, of course, never have sued her for her responsibility, but I felt like that act of finality was the only option left for me. Fortunately, we ended up meeting and seeing each other for the first time in 6 months. I’m not sure what she thought after seeing me in person, but I think that this was the first time my friend truly started to listen. Both of us are equally responsible for things escalating as they did.I’ve alluded to it previously, but I’ve processed those escalations enough to understand that this was the point where I started to develop the mindset I currently have now. It’s heavy to consider suing someone you care for and respect, and it’s heavy to feel like you have to defend your mental health to someone seemingly with the opposite opinion of the reality of things. But, those acts brought me a better understanding of just what exactly had happened to me, and allowed me to have the courage to embrace my experience for what it was. It’s been influential in my own philosophy of openness, and I try and push myself further every day.In all fairness to her, my friend is a wonderful person and I made some misfires in trying to communicate with her under duress. I could write an entire separate article about her vices or virtues and I suspect it would be overwhelmingly positive. What I am trying to say, is while I bear no negative feelings about what I experienced last year or towards her, I respect that the reason I am writing this now is because of those series of unfortunate events. I understand that if I had not been put in the position to defend the status of my own mental health to someone with a very different, fractured opinion, I would not have the courage, confidence, or commitment to be writing this article today. The most important thing that someone who has experienced a mental health crisis can do is speak palatably about their struggles. That is, in my opinion, the final step of recovery and success: taking ownership of why and how we feel the way we do/have and be comfortable speaking openly about that — to not try and forget or erase the past; but to forgive, embrace, accept and personally grow. Exploring a deeply personal and private matter has honestly been one of the happiest things I’ve done for myself. Making ourselves vulnerable is a human ability that is absolutely frightening and difficult, but in doing so, we gain a better understanding of ourselves and the world around us. We gain a sense of respect and knowledge that has no comparison, from a more deeper, philosophical level. It is a risk, in a world that stigmatizes people who have anxiety, depression or any other mental illness, but I believe that the empowerment and understanding that arises within oneself makes it very much worth it and I value and respect anyone who has it within themselves to do the same. That being said, it is perhaps hypocritical posting this anonymously, but I’ve chosen to do so in order to protect myself and my friend outside of our own circles. I do have to be careful. Stigma is an unfortunate reality of things and I am well aware of this.I can only speak to my own experience, which is very complicated, nuanced and still rather sensitive, but I suspect that taking ownership over my own hard work, having respect for both my friend and myself, and accepting this as something transient, yet unequivocally life altering, has empowered me in a highly positive way. I’m comfortable facing that this happened and facing the truth of why this happened. I know there is another person involved, who may not be of the same opinion or currently have the same mindset as me, and I’ve considered that every step of the way.